CHAPTER XXI.
I was soon introduced into the presence of the magistrate, an old benevolent man with
calm and mild manners. He looked upon me, however, with some degree of severity, and
then, turning towards my conductors, he asked to appear as witnesses on this occasion. About
half a dozen men came forward, and, one being selected by the magistrate, he deposed that
he had been out fishing the night before with his son and brother-in-law, Daniel Nugent,
when, about ten o'clock, they observed a strong northerly blast rising, and they accordingly
put in for port. It was a very dark night, as the moon had not yet risen. They did not land at the
harbor, but, as they had been accustomed, at a creek about two miles below. He walked on first,
carrying a part of the fishing tackle, and his companions followed him at some distance. As he
was proceeding along the sands, he struck his foot against something and fell at his length on the
His companions came up to assist him, and, by the light of their lantern, they found that he had
fallen on the body of a man who was, to all appearance, dead. Their first supposition was
that it was the corpse of some person who had been drowned and was thrown on shore by the waves,
but, on examination, they found that the clothes were not wet and even that the body was not then
cold. They instantly carried it to the cottage of an old woman near the spot and endeavored,
but in vain, to restore it to life. It appeared to be a handsome young man about five and twenty
years of age. He had apparently been strangled, for there was no sign of any violence except the
black mark of fingers on his neck. The first part of this deposition did not in the least interest
me, but when the mark of the fingers was mentioned, I remembered the murder of my brother and felt
myself extremely agitated. My limbs trembled, and a mist came over my eyes, which obliged me
to lean on a chair for support. The magistrate observed me with a keen eye and, of course,
drew an unfavorable augury from my manner. The son confirmed his father's account,
but when Daniel Nugent was called, he swore positively that just before the fall of his
companion he saw a boat with a single man in it at a short distance from the shore,
and as far as he could judge by the light of a few stars, it was the same boat in which I had just
landed. A woman deposed that she lived near the beach and was standing at the door of her cottage,
waiting for the return of the fisherman, about an hour before she heard of the discovery of the body,
when she saw a boat with only one man in it push off from that part of the shore where the corpse
was afterwards found. Another woman confirmed the account of the fisherman having brought the body
into her house. It was not cold. They put it into a bed and rubbed it, and Daniel went to the town
for an apothecary, but life was quite gone. Several other men were examined concerning my landing,
and they agreed that, with the strong north wind that had arisen during the night, it was very
probable that I had beaten about for many hours and had been obliged to return nearly to the same
spot from which I had departed. Besides, they observed that it appeared that I had brought the
body from another place, and it was likely that as I did not appear to know the shore, I might have
put into the harbor, ignorant of the distance of the town of Blanc, from the place where I had
deposited the corpse. Mr. Kerwin, on hearing this evidence, desired that I should be taken into the
room where the body lay for interment, that it might be observed what effect the sight of it would
produce upon me. This idea was probably suggested by the extreme agitation I had exhibited when the
murder had been described. I was accordingly conducted by the magistrate and several other
persons to the inn. I could not help being struck by the strange coincidences that had taken place
during this eventful night, but, knowing that I had been conversing with several persons in the
island I had inhabited about the time that the body had been found, I was perfectly tranquil as
to the consequences of the affair. I entered the room where the corpse lay and was led up to the
coffin. How can I describe my sensations on beholding it? I feel yet parched with horror,
nor can I reflect on that terrible moment without shuddering and agony. The examination,
the presence of the magistrate and witnesses, passed like a dream from my memory when I saw
the lifeless form of Henry Clairvaux stretched before me. I gasped for breath, and throwing
myself on the body, I exclaimed, Have my murderous machinations deprived you also,
my dearest Henry, of life? Two I have already destroyed. Other victims await their destiny,
but you, Clairvaux, my friend, my benefactor. The human frame could no longer support the agonies
that I endured, and I was carried out of the room in strong convulsions. A fever succeeded to this.
I lay for two months on the point of death. My ravings, as I afterward heard, were frightful.
I called myself the murderer of William, of Justine, and of Clairvaux. Sometimes I entreated
my attendants to assist me in the destruction of the fiend by whom I was tormented, and at others
I felt the fingers of the monster already grasping my neck and screamed aloud with agony and terror.
Fortunately, as I spoke my native language, Mr. Kerwin alone understood me,
but my gestures and bitter cries were sufficient to affright the other witnesses.
Why did I not die? More miserable than man ever was before, why did I not sink into forgetfulness
and rest? Death snatches away many blooming children, the only hopes of their doting parents.
How many brides and youthful lovers have been one day in the bloom of health and hope,
and the next to pray for worms and the decay of the tomb? Of what materials was I made that I
could thus resist so many shocks, which, like the turning of the wheel, continually renewed the
torture? But I was doomed to live, and in two months found myself as awaking from a dream,
in a prison, stretched on a wretched bed, surrounded by jailers, turnkeys, bolts, and all the
miserable apparatus of a dungeon. It was morning, I remember, when I thus awoke to understanding.
I had forgotten the particulars of what had happened, and only felt as if some great
misfortune had suddenly overwhelmed me, but when I looked around and saw the barred windows and the
swallowedness of the room in which I was, all flashed across my memory, and I groaned bitterly.
This sound disturbed an old woman who was sleeping in a chair beside me. She was a
hired nurse, the wife of one of the turnkeys, and her countenance expressed all those bad qualities
which often characterized that class. The lines of her face were hard and rude, like that of
persons accustomed to see without sympathizing in sights of misery. Her tone expressed her entire
indifference. She addressed me in English, and the voice struck me as one that I had heard during
my sufferings. Are you better now, sir? said she. I replied in the same language, with a feeble voice.
I believe I am, but if it be all true, if indeed I did not dream, I am sorry that I am still alive
to feel this misery and horror. For that matter, replied the old woman, if you mean about the
gentleman you murdered, I believe that it were better for you if you were dead, for I fancy it
will go hard with you. However, that's none of my business. I am sent to nurse you and get you well.
I do my duty with a safe conscience. It were well if everybody did the same.
I turned with loathing from the woman who could utter so unfeeling a speech to a person just saved
on the very edge of death, but I felt languid and unable to reflect on all that had passed.
The whole series of my life appeared to me as a dream. I sometimes doubted if indeed it were
all true, for it never presented itself to my mind with the force of reality.
As the images that floated before me became more distinct, I grew feverish. A darkness pressed
around me. No one was near me who soothed me with a gentle voice of love. No dear hand supported me.
The physician came and prescribed medicines, and the old woman prepared them for me,
but utter carelessness was visible in the first, and the expression of brutality was
strongly marked in the visage of the second. Who could be interested in the fate of a murderer
but the hangman who would gain his fee? These were my first reflections, but I soon learned
that Mr. Kerwin had shown me extreme kindness. He had caused the best room in the prison to be
prepared for me. Richard indeed was the best, and it was he who had provided a physician and a nurse.
It is true he seldom came to see me, for although he ardently desired to relieve
the sufferings of every human creature, he did not wish to be present at the agonies
and miserable ravings of a murderer. He came, therefore, sometimes to see that I was not
neglected, but his visits were short and with long intervals. One day, while I was gradually
recovering, I was seated in a chair, my eyes half open and my cheeks livid like those in death.
I was overcome by gloom and misery, and often reflected I had better seek death
than desire to remain in a world which to me was replete with wretchedness.
At one time I considered whether I should not declare myself guilty and suffer the penalty of
the law, less innocent than poor Justine had been. Such were my thoughts when the door of
my apartment was opened and Mr. Kerwin entered. His countenance expressed sympathy and compassion.
He drew a chair close to mine and addressed me in French.
I fear that this place is very shocking to you. Can I do anything to make you more comfortable?
I thank you, but all that you mention is nothing to me.
On the whole earth there is no comfort which I am capable of receiving.
I know that the sympathy of a stranger can be but of little relief to one born down as
you are by so strange a misfortune. But you will, I hope, soon quit this melancholy abode,
for doubtless evidence can easily be brought to free you from the criminal charge.
That is my least concern. I am, by a course of strange events, become the most miserable of
mortals. Persecuted and tortured as I am and have been, can death be any evil to me?
Nothing indeed could be more unfortunate and agonizing than the strange chances that have
lately occurred. You were thrown by some surprising accident on this shore, renowned for its
vitality, seized immediately, and charged with murder. The first sight that was presented to
your eyes was the body of your friend, murdered in so unaccountable a manner, and placed, as it
were, by some fiend across your path. As Mr. Curwen said this, notwithstanding the agitation
I endured on this retrospect of my sufferings, I also felt considerable surprise at the knowledge
he seemed to possess concerning me. I suppose some astonishment was exhibited in my countenance,
for Mr. Curwen hastened to say,
Immediately upon your being taken ill, all the papers that were on your person were brought to
me, and I examined them that I might discover some trace by which I could send to your relations in
account of your misfortune and illness. I found several letters, and among others one which I
discovered from its commencement to be from your father. I instantly wrote to Geneva. Nearly two
months have elapsed since the departure of my letter. But you are ill. Even now you tremble.
You are unfit for agitation of any kind.
The suspense is a thousand times worse than the most horrible event.
Tell me what new scene of death has been acted, and whose murderer I am now to lament.
Your family is perfectly well, said Mr. Curwen, with gentleness.
And someone, a friend, is come to visit you.
I know not by what chain of thought the idea presented itself, but it instantly darted into
my mind that the murderer had come to mock at my misery and taunt me with the death of Clairvaux,
as a new incitement for me to comply with his hellish desires.
I put my hand before my eyes and cried out in agony,
Oh, take him away! I cannot see him! For God's sake, do not let him enter!
Mr. Curwen regarded me with a troubled countenance. He could not help regarding
my exclamation as a presumption of my guilt and said in rather a severe tone,
I should have thought, young man, that the presence of your father would have been welcome
instead of inspiring such violent repugnance.
My father, cried I, while every feature and every muscle was relaxed from anguish to pleasure.
Is my father indeed come? How kind, how very kind! But where is he? Why does he not hasten to me?
My change of manner surprised and pleased the magistrate.
Perhaps he thought that my former exclamation was a momentary return of delirium,
and now he instantly resumed his former benevolence.
He rose and quitted the room with my nurse, and in a moment my father entered it.
Nothing at this moment could have given me greater pleasure than the arrival of my father.
I stretched out my hand to him and cried, Are you then safe at Elizabeth and Ernest?
My father calmed me with assurances of their welfare and endeavoured by dwelling on these
subjects so interesting to my heart to raise my desponding spirits. But he soon felt that a
prison cannot be the abode of cheerfulness. What a place is this that you inhabit, my son,
said he, looking mournfully at the barred windows and wretched appearance of the room.
You travel to seek happiness, but a fatality seems to pursue you. And poor Clairvaux!
The name of my unfortunate and murdered friend was an agitation too great to be endured in my weak
state. I shed tears. Alas, yes, my father, replied I. Some destiny of the most horrible kind hangs
over me, and I must live to fulfil it, or surely I should have died on the coffin of Henry.
We were not allowed to converse for any length of time, for the precarious state of my health
rendered every precaution necessary that could ensure tranquillity. Mr. Kerwin came in and
insisted that my strength should not be exhausted by too much exertion, but the appearance of my
father was to me like that of my good angel, and I gradually recovered my health. As my sickness
quitted me, I was absorbed by a gloomy and black melancholy that nothing could dissipate.
The image of Clairvaux was forever before me, ghastly and murdered. More than once the agitation
into which these reflections threw me made my friends dread a dangerous relapse. Alas,
why did they preserve so miserable and detested a life? It was surely that I might fulfil my
destiny, which is now drawing to a close. Soon, oh very soon, will death extinguish these throbbings
and relieve me from the mighty weight of anguish that bears me to the dust, and in executing the
award of justice I shall also sink to rest. Then the appearance of death was distant,
although the wish was ever present to my thoughts, and I often sat for hours motionless
and speechless, wishing for some mighty revolution that might bury me and my destroyer in its ruins.
The season of the assesies approached. I had already been three months in prison,
and although I was still weak and in continual danger of a relapse, I was obliged to travel
nearly a hundred miles to the country town where the court was held. Mr. Kerwin charged himself
with every care of collecting witnesses and arranging my defence. I was spared the disgrace
of appearing publicly as a criminal, as the case was not brought before the court that decides on
life and death. The grand jury rejected the bill, on its being proved that I was on the Orkney
Islands at the hour the body of my friend was found, and a fortnight after my removal
I was liberated from prison. My father was enraptured on finding me freed from the vexations
of a criminal charge, that I was again allowed to breathe the fresh atmosphere and permitted
to return to my native country. I did not participate in these feelings, for to me the
walls of a dungeon or a palace were alike hateful. The cup of life was poisoned forever, and although
the sun shone upon me, as upon the happy and gay of heart, I saw around me nothing but a dense and
frightful darkness, penetrated by no light but the glimmer of two eyes that glared upon me.
Sometimes they were the expressive eyes of Henry, languishing in death, the dark orbs nearly covered
by the lids and the long black lashes that fringed them. Sometimes it was the watery,
clouded eyes of the monster as I first saw them in my chamber at Ingolstadt.
My father tried to awaken in me the feelings of affection. He talked of Geneva, which I should
soon visit, of Elizabeth and Ernest, but these words only drew deep groans from me. Sometimes,
indeed, I felt a wish for happiness, and thought with melancholy delight of my beloved cousin,
or longed, with a devouring malady du pays, to see once more the blue lake and rapid roan
that had been so dear to me in early childhood. But my general state of feeling was a torpor
in which a prison was as welcome a residence as the divinest scene in nature, and these fits were
seldom interrupted but by paroxysms of anguish and despair. At these moments I often endeavored to
put an end to the existence I loathed, and it required unceasing attendance and vigilance to
restrain me from committing some dreadful act of violence. Yet one duty remained to me, the
recollection of which finally triumphed over my selfish despair. It was necessary that I should
return without delay to Geneva, there to watch over the lives of those I so fondly loved,
and to lie in wait for the murderer, that if any chance led me to the place of his concealment,
or if he dared again to blast me by his presence, I might, with unfailing aim, put an end to the
existence of the monstrous image which I had endued with the mockery of a soul still more
monstrous. My father still desired to delay our departure, fearful that I could not sustain the
teagues of a journey, for I was a shattered wreck, the shadow of a human being. My strength
was gone, I was a mere skeleton, and fever night and day preyed upon my wasted frame.
Still, as I urged our leaving Ireland with such inquietude and impatience,
my father thought it best to yield. We took our passage on board a vessel bound for Havre de
Grasse, and sailed with a fair wind from the Irish shores. It was midnight. I lay on the deck
looking at the stars and listening to the dashing of the waves. I hailed the darkness
that shut Ireland from my sight, and my pulse beat with a feverish joy when I reflected that
I should soon see Geneva. The past appeared to me in the light of a frightful dream,
yet the vessel in which I was, the wind that blew me from the detested shore of Ireland,
and the sea which surrounded me told me too forcibly that I was deceived by no vision,
and that Clairvaux, my friend and dearest companion, had fallen a victim to me and the
monster of my creation. I re-passed in my memory my whole life, my quiet happiness while residing
with my family in Geneva, the death of my mother, and my departure for Ingolstadt. I remembered,
shuddering, the mad enthusiasm that hurried me on to the creation of my hideous enemy,
and I called to mind the night in which he first lived. I was unable to pursue the train of thought.
A thousand feelings pressed upon me, and I wept bitterly. Ever since my recovery from the fever
I had been in the custom of taking every night a small quantity of laudanum,
for it was by means of this drug only that I was enabled to gain the rest necessary for
the preservation of life. Oppressed by the recollection of my various misfortunes,
I now swallowed double my usual quantity, and soon slept profoundly.
But sleep did not afford me respite from thought and misery.
My dreams presented a thousand objects that scared me.
Towards morning I was possessed by a kind of nightmare. I felt the fiend's grasp in my neck
and could not free myself from it. Groans and cries rang in my ears. My father, who was watching over
me, perceiving my restlessness, awoke me. The dashing waves were around, the cloudy sky above,
the fiend was not here. A sense of security, a feeling that a truce was established between
the present hour and the irresistible disastrous future, imparted to me a kind of calm forgetfulness
of which the human mind is by its structure peculiarly susceptible.
Chapter 22. The voyage came to an end. We landed and proceeded to Paris.
I soon found that I had overtaxed my strength and that I must repose before I could continue
my journey. My father's care and attentions were indefatigable, but he did not know the origin of
my sufferings and sought erroneous methods to remedy the incurable ill. He wished me to seek
amusement in society. I abhorred the face of man. Oh, not abhorred! They were my brethren,
my fellow beings, and I felt attracted to even the most repulsive among them as to creatures of an
angelic nature and celestial mechanism. But I felt that I had no right to share their intercourse.
I had unchained an enemy among them whose joy it was to shed their blood and to revel in their
groans. How they would each and all abhor me and hunt me from the world did they know my
unhallowed acts and the crimes which had their source in me. My father yielded at length to my
desire to avoid society and strove by various arguments to banish my despair. Sometimes he
thought that I felt deeply the degradation of being obliged to answer a charge of murder,
and he endeavored to prove to me the futility of pride. Alas, my father, said I, how little do you
know me? Human beings, their feelings and passions would indeed be degraded if such a wretch as I
pride. Justine, poor unhappy Justine, was as innocent as I, and she suffered the same charge.
She died for it, and I am the cause of this. I murdered her. William, Justine, and Henry,
they all died by my hands. My father had often, during my imprisonment, heard me make the same
assertion. When I thus accused myself, he sometimes seemed to desire an explanation,
and at others he appeared to consider it as the offspring of delirium, and that, during my illness,
some idea of this kind had presented itself to my imagination, the remembrance of which I preserved
in my convalescence. I avoided explanation and maintained a continual silence concerning the
wretch I had created. I had a persuasion that I should be supposed mad, and this in itself would
forever have chained my tongue. But, besides, I could not bring myself to disclose a secret
which would fill my hearer with consternation, and make fear and unnatural horror the inmates
of his breast. I checked, therefore, my impatient thirst for sympathy, and was silent when I would
have given the world to have confided the fatal secret. Yet still words like those I have recorded
uncontrollably from me. I could offer no explanation of them, but their truth in part relieved the
burden of my mysterious woe. Upon this occasion, my father said, with an expression of unbounded
wonder, My dearest Victor, what infatuation is this? My dear son, I entreat you never to
make such an assertion again. I am not mad, I cried energetically. The sun and the heavens
which have viewed my operations can bear witness of my truth. I am the assassin of those most
innocent victims. They died by my machinations. A thousand times would I have shed my own blood,
drop by drop, to have saved their lives. But I could not, my father. Indeed, I could not sacrifice
the whole human race. The conclusion of this speech convinced my father that my ideas were
deranged, and he instantly changed the subject of our conversation and endeavored to alter the
my thoughts. He wished as much as possible to obliterate the memory of the scenes that
had taken place in Ireland, and never alluded to them or suffered me to speak of my misfortunes.
As time passed away, I became more calm. Misery had her dwelling in my heart, but I no longer
talked in the same incoherent manner of my own crimes. Sufficient for me was the consciousness
of them. By the utmost self-violence, I curbed the imperious voice of wretchedness, which sometimes
desired to declare itself to the whole world, and my manners were calmer and more composed
than they had ever been since my journey to the Sea of Ice. A few days before we left Paris on
our way to Switzerland, I received the following letter from Elizabeth.
My dear friend, it gave me the greatest pleasure to receive a letter from my uncle dated at Paris.
You are no longer at a formidable distance, and I may hope to see you in less than a fortnight.
My poor cousin, how much you must have suffered! I expect to see you looking even more ill than
when you quitted Geneva. This winter has been passed most miserably, tortured as I have been
by anxious suspense, yet I hope to see peace in your countenance and to find that your heart
is not totally void of comfort and tranquility. Yet I fear that the same feelings now exist that
made you so miserable a year ago, even perhaps augmented by time. I would not disturb you at
period when so many misfortunes weigh upon you, but a conversation that I had with my uncle
previous to his departure renders some explanation necessary before we meet. Explanation? You may
possibly say, what can Elizabeth have to explain? If you really say this, my questions are answered
and all my doubts satisfied. But you are distant from me, and it is possible that you may dread
and yet be pleased with this explanation. And in a probability of this being the case, I dare not
any longer postpone writing what, during your absence, I have often wished to express to you,
but have never had the courage to begin. You well know, Victor, that our union had been the
favorite plan of your parents ever since our infancy. We were told this when young and taught
to look forward to it as an event that would certainly take place. We were affectionate playfellows
during childhood and, I believe, dear and valued friends to one another as we grew older. But as
brother and sister often entertain a lively affection towards each other without desiring a
more intimate union, may not such also be our case? Tell me, dearest Victor. Answer me. I
conjure you by our mutual happiness with simple truth. Do you not love another? You have traveled,
you have spent several years of your life at Ingolstadt, and I confess to you, my friend,
that when I saw you last autumn so unhappy, flying to solitude from the society of every creature,
I could not help supposing that you might regret our connection and believe yourself bound in honor
to fulfill the wishes of your parents, although they opposed themselves to your inclinations.
But this is false reasoning. I confess to you, my friend, that I love you and that in my airy
dreams of futurity you have been my constant friend and companion. But it is your happiness
I desire as well as my own when I declared to you that our marriage would render me eternally
miserable unless it were the dictate of your own free choice. Even now I weep to think that,
born down as you are by the cruelest misfortunes, you may stifle, by the word honor, all hope of
that love and happiness which would alone restore you to yourself. I, who have so disinterested
in affection for you, may increase your miseries tenfold by being an obstacle to your wishes.
Ah, Victor, be assured that your cousin and playmate has too sincere a love for you
not to be made miserable by this supposition. Be happy, my friend, and if you obey me in this
one request, remain satisfied that nothing on earth will have the power to interrupt my tranquility.
Do not let this letter disturb you. Do not answer tomorrow or the next day or even until you come
if it will give you pain. My uncle will send me news of your health, and if I see but one
smile on your lips when we meet, occasioned by this or any other exertion of mine, I shall need
no other happiness. Elizabeth Levenza, Geneva, May 18th, 17 blank.
This letter revived in my memory what I had before forgotten, the threat of the fiend.
I will be with you on your wedding night. Such was my sentence, and on that night would the
demon employ every art to destroy me and tear me from the glimpse of happiness which promised
partly to console my sufferings. On that night he determined to consummate his crimes by my death.
Well, be it so. A deadly struggle would then assuredly take place in which if he were victorious
I should be at peace and his power over me be at an end. If he were vanquished I should be a free man.
Alas, what freedom! Such as the peasant enjoys when his family have been massacred before his
cottage burnt, his lands laid waste, and he is turned adrift, homeless, penniless, and alone,
but free. Such would be my liberty, except that in my Elizabeth I possessed a treasure,
alas, balanced by those horrors of remorse and guilt which would pursue me until death.
Sweet and beloved Elizabeth, I read and re-read her letter, and some softened feelings stole into
my heart, and dared to whisper paradisiacal dreams of love and joy. But the apple was already eaten,
and the angel's arm bared to drive me from all hope. Yet I would die to make her happy.
If the monster executed his threat, death was inevitable. Yet, again, I considered whether my
marriage would hasten my fate. My destruction might indeed arrive a few months sooner,
but if my torturer should suspect that I postponed it, influenced by his menaces,
he would surely find other and perhaps more dreadful means of revenge.
He had vowed to be with me on my wedding night, yet he did not consider that threat as binding
him to peace in the meantime, for as if to show me that he was not yet satiated with blood,
he had murdered Clairvaux immediately after the enunciation of his threats.
I resolved, therefore, that if my immediate union with my cousin would conduce either to hers or my
father's happiness, my adversary's designs against my life should not retard it a single hour.
In this state of mind I wrote to Elizabeth. My letter was calm and affectionate.
I fear, my beloved girl, I said, little happiness remains for us on earth.
Yet all that I may one day enjoy is centered in you. Chase away your idle fears. To you alone do
I consecrate my life and my endeavors for contentment. I have one secret, Elizabeth,
a dreadful one. When revealed to you, it will chill your frame with horror, and then, far from
being surprised at my misery, you will only wonder that I survive what I have endured.
I will confide this tale of misery and terror to you the day after our marriage shall take place.
For, my sweet cousin, there must be perfect confidence between us.
But until then, I conjure you, do not mention or allude to it.
This I most earnestly entreat, and I know you will comply.
In about a week after the arrival of Elizabeth's letter we returned to Geneva.
The sweet girl welcomed me with warm affection, yet tears were in her eyes as she beheld my
emaciated frame and feverish cheeks. I saw a change in her also. She was thinner and had lost
much of that heavenly vivacity that had before charmed me, but her gentleness and soft looks of
compassion made her a more fit companion for one blasted and miserable as I was.
The tranquility which I now enjoy did not endure. Memory brought madness with it,
and when I thought of what had passed a real insanity possessed me. Sometimes I was furious
and burnt with rage, sometimes low and despondent. I neither spoke nor looked at anyone, but sat
motionless, bewildered by the multitude of miseries that overcame me.
Elizabeth alone had the power to draw me from these fits. Her gentle voice would soothe me
when transported by passion and inspire me with human feelings when sunk in torpor.
She wept with me and for me. When reason returned she would remonstrate and endeavor to inspire me
with resignation. Ah, it is well for the unfortunate to be resigned, but for the guilty there is no
peace. The agonies of remorse poison the luxury that is otherwise sometimes found in indulging
the excess of grief. Soon after my arrival my father spoke of my immediate marriage with
Elizabeth. I remained silent. Have you then some other attachment? None on earth. I love
Elizabeth and look forward to our union with delight. Let the day therefore be fixed and on
it I will consecrate myself in life or death to the happiness of my cousin.
My dear Victor, do not speak thus. Heavy misfortunes have befallen us, but let us
only cling closer to what remains and transfer our love for those whom we have lost to those who yet
live. Our circle will be small but bound close by the ties of affection and mutual misfortune,
and when time shall have softened your despair new and dear objects of care will be born
to replace those of whom we have been so cruelly deprived.
Such were the lessons of my father, but to me the remembrance of the threat returned.
Nor can you wonder that, omnipotent as the fiend had yet been in his deeds of blood,
I should almost regard him as invincible, and that when he had pronounced the words
I shall be with you on your wedding night I should regard the threatened fate as unavoidable.
But death was no evil to me if the laws of Elizabeth were balanced with it,
and I therefore with a contented and even cheerful countenance agreed with my father
that if my cousin would consent the ceremony should take place in ten days,
and thus put, as I imagined, the seal to my fate.
Great God, if for one instant I had thought what might be the hellish intention of my fiendish
adversary I would rather have banished myself forever from my native country and wandered a
cast over the earth than have consented to this miserable marriage. But, as if possessed of magic
powers, the monster had blinded me to his real intentions, and when I thought that I had prepared
only my own death I hastened that of a far dearer victim. As the period fixed for our marriage drew
nearer, whether from cowardice or a prophetic feeling, I felt my heart sink within me. But I
concealed my feelings by an appearance of hilarity that brought smiles and joy to the countenance of
my father, but hardly deceived the ever watchful and nicer eye of Elizabeth.
She looked forward to our union with placid contentment, not unmingled with a little fear,
which past misfortunes had impressed that what now appeared certain and tangible happiness might
soon dissipate into an airy dream and leave no trace but deep and everlasting regret.
Preparations were made for the event, congratulatory visits were received,
and all wore a smiling appearance. I shut up, as well as I could, in my own heart,
the anxiety that prayed there, and entered with seeming earnestness into the plans of my father,
although they might only serve as the decorations of my tragedy.
Through my father's exertions a part of the inheritance of Elizabeth had been restored to
her by the Austrian government. A small possession on the shores of Como belonged to her. It was
to spend our first days of happiness beside the beautiful lake near which it stood.
In the meantime, I took every precaution to defend my person in case the fiend should
openly attack me. I carried pistols and a dagger constantly about me and was ever on the watch to
prevent artifice, and by these means gained a greater degree of tranquility. Indeed, as the
period approached, the threat appeared more as a delusion, not to be regarded as worthy to disturb
my peace, while the happiness I hoped for in my marriage wore a greater appearance of certainty as
the day fixed for its solemnization drew nearer, and I heard it continually spoken of as an
occurrence which no accident could possibly prevent. Elizabeth seemed happy. My tranquil demeanor
contributed greatly to calm her mind. But on the day that was to fulfill my wishes and my destiny
she was melancholy, and a presentiment of evil pervaded her. And perhaps also she thought of
the dreadful secret which I had promised to reveal to her on the following day.
My father was in the meantime overjoyed and in the bustle of preparation
only recognized in the melancholy of his niece the diffidence of a bride.
After the ceremony was performed a large party assembled at my father's, but it was agreed that
Elizabeth and I should commence our journey by water, sleeping that night at Evian and continuing
our voyage on the following day. The day was fair, the wind favorable, all smiled on our nuptial
embarkation. Those were the last moments of my life during which I enjoyed the feeling of happiness.
We passed rapidly along, the sun was hot, but we were sheltered from its rays by a kind of canopy,
while we enjoyed the beauty of the scene, sometimes on one side of the lake, where we saw Mount
Salève, the pleasant banks of Mont-Alegre, and at a distance surmounting all, the beautiful
Mont Blanc and the assemblage of snowy mountains that in vain endeavored to emulate her. Sometimes
coasting the opposite banks we saw the mighty Jura opposing its dark side to the ambition that
would quit its native country, and an almost insurmountable barrier to the invader who should
wish to enslave it. I took the hand of Elizabeth. You are sorrowful, my love. Ah, if you knew what
I have suffered and what I may yet endure, you would endeavor to let me taste the quiet and
freedom from despair that this one day at least permits me to enjoy. Be happy, my dear Victor,
replied Elizabeth. There is, I hope, nothing to distress you, and be assured that if a lively joy
is not painted in my face, my heart is contented. Something whispers to me not to depend too much
on the prospect that is opened before us, but I will not listen to such a sinister voice. Observe
how fast we move along, and how the clouds, which sometimes obscure and sometimes rise above the
dome of Mont Blanc, render this scene of beauty still more interesting. Look also at the
innumerable fish that are swimming in the clear waters, where we can distinguish every pebble
that lies at the bottom. What a divine day! How happy and serene all nature appears!
Thus Elizabeth endeavored to divert her thoughts and mind from all reflection upon melancholy
subjects. But her temper was fluctuating, joy for a few instants shown in her eyes,
but it continually gave place to distraction and reverie.
The sun sank lower in the heavens. We passed the river Drance and observed its path through the
chasms of the higher and the glens of the lower hills. The Alps here come closer to the lake,
and we approached the amphitheater of mountains which formed its eastern boundary.
The spire of Evian shone under the woods that surrounded it and the range of mountain above
mountain by which it was overhung. The wind, which had hitherto carried us along with amazing
rapidity, sank at sunset to a light breeze. The soft air just ruffled the water and caused a
pleasant motion among the trees as we approached the shore, from which it wafted the most delightful
scent of flowers and hay. The sun sank beneath the horizon as we landed, and as I touched the
shore I felt those cares and fears revive which soon were to clasp me and cling to me forever.